>> Given that heart disease
is the leading cause of death
in the world, prevention and
treatment has never been more
important.
While conventional
cardiology relies heavily
on pharmaceuticals
and the management
of cardiac conditions,
music has been
shown to have remarkable
benefits without any side
effects.
Music as medicine.
This is Gaia News.
[THEME MUSIC]
Ancient cultures understood
the healing benefits of music,
and integrated it into their
promotion of health and healing
of disease.
This practice was mostly lost
in the rise of Western medicine.
Today, that connection
is gradually
being restored as a
new wave of research
is being done on the healing
benefits of music on the heart.
One such recent study found
that listening to music
is linked to a significant
reduction in anxiety and pain
after major heart surgery.
The researchers concluded that
clinicians should consider
music for patients
scheduled for surgery, as it
has none of the
risks or side effects
and many of the
benefits of the drugs
most commonly used to aid
in post-surgery recovery.
Other studies have
shown that music
modulates blood pressure,
heart rate, and respiration,
and can even lower
the rate of death
after a heart attack or stroke.
Dr. Stephen Sinatra is a
cardiologist and author
who has been incorporating music
in his practice for decades.
>> What the music does, it tones
down the overactive sympathetic
nervous system, and it balances
the sympathetic nervous system
with the parasympathetic.
And that in itself is a great
reliever of panic and anxiety.
When you have the biochemical
alterations going down,
the body responds in a
more appropriate manner.
It has what we call a
positive impact on heart rate
variability.
It can actually decrease
a person's blood pressure.
I've seen that over
and over again.
I have even seen music have an
impact on cardiac arrhythmia.
And that's why I've used it over
and over again in my practice
over the years.
>> Dr. Joanne Loewy, the
director of the Louis Armstrong
Center for Music and
Medicine at Mount Sinai,
Beth Israel Hospital, had this
take on the effects of music
on the heart.
>> We know, for instance,
in the life cycle,
the first sound a
premature infant hears,
a neonate in the
womb, is cardiac.
Its rhythm.
The music brain
formulates neural pathways
which have been shown to be
able to have music predominance.
This means that we can
implement music that's
indicated in things like
building resilience,
and cardiac strength
and resilience.
>> Another of music benefits is
creating heart-brain coherence.
Barry Goldstein is a
composer and author
whose music has been used in a
number of therapeutic settings.
He had this to say about
this important phenomenon.
>> So music can be used very
effectively in creating heart
coherence and also
with brain coherence.
And coherence, when we're
talking about heart coherence,
is when our heart
has the ability
to move to a smooth
orderly heart rhythms.
The heart has the ability to
dictate that tempo that goes
out to the rest of our systems.
Music can engage
the heart to moving
into those smooth
orderly rhythms
by targeting specific tempos.
And when we utilize
heart entrainment, which
is the heart synchronizing
to the external tempo
of the music, we can move
to smoother and more orderly
heart rhythms that then set the
tempo for the rest of our body
to move into more
coherence as well.
>> When used therapeutically,
what kind of music is most
beneficial to the heart?
>> Therapeutic music played
in time with the live rhythms.
This is showing an even deeper
and more profound effect.
This harbors safety
and harbors security,
and decreases the
stress response,
which affects the body and
the body's disease process.
>> Music therapists, such as
those at the Louis Armstrong
Center for Music and Medicine,
approach the utilization
of music and an intimate
personalized way.
>> In general, the rule is to
meet patients in their favorite
kind of music, and then
to design and prescribe
what's going to serve them best
if they're completely stressed
and their heart rate is
super high and scattered,
we don't want to immediately
implode something relaxing.
>> Given the promising
findings of recent studies,
there is much excitement
about future research
into the healing benefits
of music on the heart.
>> A lot of studies are
really talking about music
in a general way, that
music helped in this way,
or music therapy
helped in this way.
But what if we actually
design that studies much more
specifically utilizing specific
frequencies in the music that
could show benefit, or utilizing
specific tempos within music
that can be of benefit,
or even new genres
that we're looking at
that are specifically
towards music that
can be researched.
>> While more research
is forthcoming,
it's already clear that
music truly is medicine.
For new perspective,
this is Gaia News.